Heart Disease Data collected up to 2022 on 400k adults

Key Indicators of Heart Disease
2022 annual CDC survey data of 400k adults related to their health status
What topic does the dataset cover?

According to the CDC, heart disease is one of the leading causes of death for people of most races 
in the US (African Americans, American Indians and Alaska Natives, and white people). About half 
of all Americans (47%) have at least 1 of 3 key risk factors for heart disease: high blood pressure
high cholesterol, and smoking. Other key indicator include diabetic status, obesity (high BMI),
not getting enough physical activity or drinking too much alcohol. Detecting and preventing the
factors that have the greatest impact on heart disease is very important in healthcare.
Computational developments, in turn, allow the application of machine learning methods to detect
"patterns" from the data that can predict a patient's condition.

The abstract outlines the problem statement in a succinct manner, highlighting the key issues and challenges to be addressed.

Coronary heart disease (CHD) is a major public health concern that affects millions of individuals
worldwide. The prevalence of CHD is influenced by multiple lifestyles and behavioral factors, such
as sleep cycle, gender, race, age, physical health, BMI, diseases such as diabetes, asthma, and skin
cancer, and addictive habits like alcohol addiction, and smoking habits. Several such
lifestyle-related factors are known to influence the risk of developing CHD; however, the extent to
which these factors contribute is not well understood. Therefore, it is essential to investigate the
association of various lifestyle factors. Many factors such as hyperlipidemia, type 2 diabetes, and
hypertension are known to be associated with CHD.

Smoking and high alcohol consumption are important modifiable lifestyle-related factors linked to
increased CHD risk. Smoking cessation has been shown to have a long-term impact on CHD prevention.
Chronic alcohol use can increase CHD risk by promoting high blood pressure and increasing harmful
lipid levels. Sleep disturbances, such as sleep apnea, have also been linked to increased CHD risk.
Sleep apnea can lead to hypertension, inflammation, and changes in the autonomic nervous system that
may increase the incidence of arrhythmias, heart failure, and CHD. Obesity, diabetes, hypertension,
and high cholesterol levels are metabolic risk factors that have been identified as potent
contributors to CHD. These factors increase CHD risk by promoting inflammation, insulin resistance,
and endothelial dysfunction, which can lead to atherosclerosis. In conclusion, the lifestyle-related
factors discussed above have been shown to increase the risk of CHD through different mechanisms.
Adopting a healthy lifestyle and modifying these factors can help to reduce the incidence of CHD.

A cross-sectional, observational study on a larger population would provide insight into the
correlation of these factors to CHD. Patients’ medical histories will be utilized to carry out this
study and various statistical analyses would reveal the significance of the association. Broadly,
patients’ data will be categorized according to their lifestyle habits, community, and environment
(habitat), underlying diseases and addictive habits.

Where did the dataset come from and what treatments did it undergo?

Originally, the dataset come from the CDC and is a major part of the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System (BRFSS), which conducts annual telephone surveys to gather data on the health
status of U.S. residents. As the CDC describes: "Established in 1984 with 15 states, BRFSS now
collects data in all 50 states as well as the District of Columbia and three U.S. territories. BRFSS
completes more than 400,000 adult interviews each year, making it the largest continuously conducted
health survey system in the world.". The most recent dataset (as of February 15, 2022) includes data
from 2022. It consists of 401,958 rows and 279 columns. The vast majority of columns are questions
asked to respondents about their health status, such as "Do you have serious difficulty walking or
climbing stairs?" or "Have you smoked at least 100 cigarettes in your entire life? [Note: 5 packs =
100 cigarettes]". In this dataset, I noticed many different factors (questions) that directly or
indirectly influence heart disease, so I decided to select the most relevant variables from it and do
some cleaning so that it would be usable for machine learning projects.

What can you do with this dataset?
As described above, the original dataset of nearly 300 variables was reduced to just about 20
variables. In addition to classical EDA, this dataset can be used to apply a range of machine
learning methods, most notably classifier models (logistic regression, SVM, random forest, etc.).
You should treat the variable "HeartDisease" as a binary ("Yes" - respondent had heart disease; "No"
- respondent had no heart disease).